Reed Brody is a war crimes prosecutor
and author of the book to catch a
dictator and he's joining us live from
New York thank you very much for your
time Mr Brody uh your reaction firstly
to the Court's ruling and what you've
heard well I think this this is just
huge um the the the icj has really
stepped up uh to confront the reality of
the escalation uh in in in the Gaza
Strip I mean these are
very
specific orders um you know stop the
offensive in Rafa open the Rafa border
crossing allow in fact finding missions
there's not a lot of wiggle room here um
I I'm really impressed well first of all
by South Africa's
tenacity uh and perseverance in keeping
coming back to the court in holding
their feet to the fire and saying this
is not enough this is no longer good and
the court has responded and responded
almost
unanimously including all of the western
judges um on the court um who have
really been as as as radical as as as
reality I mean South Africa has been
asking since day one for an order for
for Israel to stop its military very
offensive the court has always said well
you know we can't do that because uh
you're because Hamas because palestin is
not before this court we cannot only
order one side to stand down and that's
what they have finally chosen to do here
um and it's a testament to uh uh this
court it's a testament to South Africa
um and it does I think together with the
decision uh by the ICC prosecutor
earlier this week it it is a real one
two legal punch that's really
interesting of course the international
criminal court and the international
court of justice are separate but can
they influence what the other is
doing oh I have no doubt I I I don't
know how much the the this court has
been influenced by the IC um but I I do
feel like the ICC has been the
prosecutor has been uh influenced I mean
we have you know the the the the
question of Palestine has been on the
desk of three successive ICC prosecutors
for 15 years and no one wanted to really
uh bite the bullet and do something even
this
prosecutor um who came in uh you there
was a lot of speculation I was with him
at the uh ICC assembly in in December uh
I've seen his uh body his his his
rhetoric and many people felt he would
not do anything that this was a red l i
mean the I the political constellation
at the ICC and the icj is different and
it was always assumed that there was a
red line that the prosecutor of the ICC
would not cross and that was indicting
an Israeli official and I think it's the
the the the continued Onslaught by
Israel the international consensus
around the criminality of Israel's
activities but also this case before the
other court before the icj um in which
the icj has been saying that South
Africa essentially has a case to answer
that Israel has a case to answer on
genocide that made it untenable for the
ICC prosecutor not to act Mr bro do you
think that that continuing Onslaught by
Israel that you mention that the latest
orders by the international court of
justice can have an impact because since
the international court of justice
ordered the first set of provisional
measures in January Israel has killed
more than 15,000 civilians in Gaza so
does the latest ruling put more pressure
on Israel and more importantly does it
put more pressure pressure on the United
States I think that I think that's what
it does I mean Israel has not been
impressed with anything that the icj
judges have done yet but I think it's to
the rest of the world um uh who now have
in front of them very specific this is
not a question of are you doing are you
behaving are you not behaving are you um
complying I mean the first ruling was
comply with the genocide convention uh
allow humanitarian Aid the second ruling
was Stronger ensure humanitarian things
but this is very specific you are or you
are not stopping your military offensive
you are or you are are not opening the
RAF of Crossing you are or are not
allowing in fact finding missions and
and and the like and I think that this
put puts obviously the United States uh
uh in a very very difficult position
this the US judge voted for these
measures uh all the US judges I mean
again these judges are elected in their
personal capacity they're among the most
distinguished jurists in the world but
it is indicative that all of the western
judges uh voted for these measures Mr
Brody I want to go go back to one uh
point that you made at the beginning of
the interview where you said that the
orders are so clear they leave no wiggle
room but I do want to speak to you ask
you you know because you are a war
crimes prosecutor you have so much
experience about the wording of the most
important order which is that Israel has
to immediately halt its military
offensive any other action which may
inflict on the Palestinian group in Gaza
conditions of life that could bring
about its physical destruction in whole
or in part could Israel argue that its
operations in Gaza don't bring about the
destruction of the Palestinian
people you know I I I actually haven't
seen where the commas to be honest I
haven't seen where the commas are in
that sentence and and and and what
does um stop immediately halt its
military offensive in the rafid
government and other and other actions
which uh May create these conditions and
I don't know whether that which create
these conditions
modifies halt all your military actions
right or other actions so I don't I
don't want to answer that without seeing
where the commas are in that sentence
okay Mr Brody we will be speaking to you
over the next few hours so we'll give
you time to get your head around the
exact wording of that for now that is
war crimes prosecutor Reed bro thank you
now let's get more on this with hindel
in Al balah in central Gaza uh H has
there been any reaction yet to this very
significant orders from the
international court of justice
especially pertaining to Rafa and the
situation in
Rafa well unfortunately there is no
reaction because most of the people here
where I am right now do not have any
connection to the internet or to any
cause only journalists are well aware of
what's happening again people here in
the Gaza Strip are currently striving to
feed themselves to find clean water to
drink uh to find a spot to live after
the continuous displacement so people
are not very well aware of what's going
on they're asking journalists and
they're knocking our doors and asking us
if there's anything positive but uh
actually we're waiting a little bit to
see what this uh is going to turn out we
really don't want to tell people news
and to to give them hope because we have
been uh witnessing a couple of times
where we told them uh positive news but
it turned out like no it's not so we're
waiting a little bit to tell people uh
the situation in rafah is very intense
um there has been carpet bombing for uh
a couple of residential areas in Al
shabura refugee camp in the central
draah uh according to our sources there
they said that a couple of injuries made
it to the Kuwaiti hospital but again
alaiti hospital is a very small medical
point they do not have icus they do not
have uh um they only have a couple of
beds and they do not have a lot of
doctors uh because most of the doctors
uh were uh evacuated to the middle area
so the situation is uh still uh uh um
escalating uh the Israeli tanks are
expanding their land incursion and they
are only 400 m away from Al naar
Hospital in Rafa um our sources are
telling us that air strikes did not stop
artillery shelling did not stop and we
are also talking about 2
800,000 Palestinians that evacuated from
rafah to um the middle area andun in the
past couple of weeks when the Israeli
forces ordered Palestinians to evacuate
but there there are at least 300,000
Palestinians still till this point in
Rafa and judge Salam of the president of
the international court of justice
mentioned exactly those numbers when
issuing those provisional orders for
Israel to stop its military operation in
Rafa where you are H what is happening
at alaka hospital behind you because
we've heard UNICEF say that the lives of
more than 20 newborns at that hospital
are threatened because oxygen will stop
as not enough fuel is delivered
well it was a very hard night for Al OA
hospital last night all of this building
turned off because the hospital ran out
of fuel but uh uh thanks God um the
World Health Organization gave uh the AL
AXA Hospital 15,000 L of fuel but
unfortunately these this number is only
um it fuels up the hospital for 4 days
only because the hospital needs at least
4,000 lers per day where we're talking
about hundreds of of uh kidney dialysis
patients who made it all the way from
Rafa to uh ala Hospital we're talking
about more than 700 uh patients that are
receiving their dialysis treatment every
single day we're talking about premature
babies we're talking about people
connected to the oxygen machines we're
talking about surgeries where every
single day multiple and dozens of
injuries make it to Ala hospital after
they have been uh targeted by the
Israeli forces airri
uh this is the one of the only uh
hospitals still standing on uh uh it its
feet and if anything happens if we they
don't have consistent fuel there's going
to be a dire situation in the middle
area in the Gaza City and thank you very
much for that hindel live in Al
Bala let's bring in Imran Khan now a
reminder to our viewers that Prim
Minister Benjamin netanyahu's government
has banned Al jaaz in Israel which is
why we are reporting from the Jordanian
C am man Imran I hear that you've
already seen some reaction from Israel
to the
ruling that's right what we're hearing
from diplomatic s sources to Israeli
Channel 13 uh the TV channel uh prime
minister Netanyahu is going to convene
an emergency meeting in that meeting uh
will be the foreign minister Israel Katz
war minister Benny Gant and the
government's judicial advisor that's how
seriously they're taking this ruling but
the first reaction has actually come
from uh the Finance Minister Beth Del
smartr uh one of the governing one of
the members of the hard right part of
the Coalition he says the state of
Israel is at War for its own existence
in sad times in history we could not
stand on our own today the Jewish people
have the independence and ability to
protect our lives it's a lengthy
statement but he ends with um we
continue to fight for ourselves in the
entire free world history will judge the
who today stood by the Nazis of Hamas
and Isis now we're also hearing from
political sources uh speaking to local
media in Israel um they're being told
that Israel is not going to respond uh
to the decision of the Court uh both
politically or militarily it's already
holding uh under the table talks with
America uh those talks have been ongoing
since this decision was about to take
place and they expect Washington to veto
the resolution all right Imran thank you
for that Imran Khan joining us live from
Aman let's bring
in make sure to subscribe to our channel
to get the latest news from Al jazer